So my first question to you is can you tell me about your experience of coming to Wales?
Well, as you know, I was born and raised in Guyana. I initially came to the United Kingdom in 2021 to work in the NHS.
When I landed I
wasn't meant to come to Wales.
I started out in Liverpool, but I met my husband and
I moved to Wales. We got married and then I moved to Wales.
So that's how I ended up in Wales.
Take your time, take your time. I'll just give you, you know, some time to zoom back in.
As I would have mentioned when we had the workshop, I learned about Wales
through my granddad because he had a slate with the Welsh dragon on it.
And that's how I learned about Wales. So when I moved to Wales, you know, I was quite happy.
I remembered, you know, that little
moment we had when I was a child about Wales.
Yeah.
Yeah, I think it's really interesting that you had that slate.
Why he had that or how he had that?
Because Guyana was once a British colony.
They did a lot of trade in between the Caribbean, South America and the UK.
So
back then they weren't any
white boards or chalk boards. They used slates to
write, to take notes in school.
So I would assume that it came from this part, this part of the world for them to use there in schools because
he went to a Catholic school and I think it was run by some missionaries from the UK.
So I guess that's where he got it from.
Were they still using those slates when you were in school or was it something different?
No, it was totally different.
I think they got rid of them sometime in the early 80s.
No, when I went to school, they were books.
Yeah, books.
Did he tell you much about how it was to use the slate or did you just inherit it sort of without any stories attached to it?
Just a little story.
He just mentioned that he used it in the early 80s.
He just mentioned that he used it in school and the school that he went to, it was under like a house
because the house was high but there was no enclosure at the bottom because I don't know if you're familiar with
Caribbean houses but what they were like in the 70s, 80s, 90s, it was just the upper part but the lower part, it was completely open.
It was mostly like that to hold functions like schools, church and any other function.
He just mentioned that there was an organization that had a little school under a house and that's what they used to take notes.
He was quite a bit of a hoarder so he had loads of bits and pieces from his early life.
And then you said that when you had it, you turned it out round and it was the Welsh Dragon on the back.
Yes, there was the Welsh Dragon on the back.
I didn't know what it was and then he told me, you know, that's from the United Kingdom, maybe one day you'll get there.
I didn't quite understand what he meant by that at that time because I was just about six years old and here I am today.
Was that an aspiration for people, do you think, getting to?
It is. It still is in all fairness.
Especially if you grew up the way I did with very little opportunities, it's kind of your benchmark for your career, your professional life,
to eventually study and migrate so that you can, in hopes that you can give your family a better life because there are not much opportunities
even though we're still a developing country and you would think that things are better.
Things are, in a sense, better from the eight seventies and the eighties and the nineties.
But, you know, it's still the benchmark. You go to secondary school, you go to university and then you migrate.
That's interesting, isn't it, about how, yeah.
It is. It is quite interesting.
It's part of the story of success, I think.
Yeah.
I wonder if you could or if you'd feel comfortable telling me about what home means to you now.
Going back home is not an option for me.
Home, it's really where my heart is, but in reality I don't think that I can return.
There's just not a life there for me anymore.
Like I would have mentioned, the benchmark, you know, we go to school and we strive to leave.
As early as possible.
So it's a case whereby going back home for me will mean that I'm regressing.
And I think for me, it'll feel like I'm, like I failed.
Is there anything more you can tell me about that?
Yeah, because I, let me put it this way, I am the first in my family to have a tertiary education.
And there is a, you know, I'm not the only one who has a degree in the university.
I'm the only one who has a degree in the university.
I am the first in my family to have a tertiary education.
And there is a, there are high expectations for me.
So if I go back home, it will, I'll be disappointing a lot of people.
I don't have, I don't have the option of going back home.
To start my life there again.
So that's me being honest, because they've my, I lost my dad when I was eight.
And my mom, she didn't have a tertiary education.
She didn't, she didn't even have a secondary education.
She just went up to primary school because of her life, you know, and my grandparents, they were quite poor.
She had to quit school quite early to help with the family.
And she never got the opportunity to go back.
So she made sure that I got a proper education so that I can look after the family.
So I'm basically looking after my family back home.
So home, well, it would mean a lot to me to go back and continue my life there.
It's simply not possible.
Thank you for sharing that.
I think it's important to hear those kind of complex reasons, you know,
and complex kind of stories and pressures that, you know, you're carrying.
So thank you for sharing a bit more about that.
I wonder if you can describe a place or a time in your life that's important to you.
Oh, it was the day I finished, finished nursing school, finished university
and found out that I'd passed my state finals to get my license because I struggled through uni when I was doing my degree to become a nurse.
And there were all sorts of challenges financially.
You know, I had just gotten out of a really abusive relationship as well.
And I was, you know, getting myself together, you know, healing from that.
So I really struggled.
And at one point, I thought, you know, I would make it out, you know, be another statistic.
And I, I, I found out that I passed.
It was the 14th of February 2014.
I found out I had that bit of information.
And I was really happy because I know that would have been my turning point.
So I would have been, I would be able to provide for my family and subsequently be able to move.
So that that really, really stands out to me.
I always carry that in my heart.
Yeah.
Sounds like a big achievement.
It has been very proud.
Yeah.
How long after that did you move to Liverpool?
2021, quite a few years after, because part of my training, it was funded by the government.
And I was contractually obligated to them for five years.
So I had to start my contract.
And then I was free.
As soon as I was free, I was out.
How old were you when you, when you came here?
I was just turned 30 in June.
Yeah, 30.
So not very old at all.
No.
Speaking of age, I wonder if you feel comfortable telling me a bit about your childhood.
Yeah, sure.
I grew up in a really small rural community, just outside of the capital city of Georgetown.
I am the only child for my mom and dad.
My dad had two other kids that were older than me.
I have two sisters.
I really had a simple childhood.
We weren't rich.
We weren't.
We were quite poor.
And my dad, he was fortunate enough to have the opportunity to go to university.
He was a civil engineer, but he passed early.
He died of leukemia.
So it was just my mom and I for a really, really long time.
And it was quite simple, even though we didn't have much.
It was, it was lovely.
I had lots of friends.
I had a roof over my head.
I had food and I went to school and I did exceptionally well in school, not to brag.
I did really well in school.
So that was a plus.
But, you know, and I read a lot when I was four years old.
The first my first memory of my dad is him getting me a book when I was four years old.
And I still have it to this day.
So I read early.
I was one of those children that read really early.
So I was always fond of reading.
So where we lived, there wasn't a library in the community.
So there was one in the neighboring village.
So my mom would allow me to walk once every other week to go get books from the library.
So reading kept me out of trouble.
It kept me grounded and it took me places, you know.
So, yeah, I had a really good childhood.
My teenage years weren't, you know, that that good.
I had a baby at 16.
So I have a 17 year old daughter.
And even though I had a child, I was still supported by my mom.
So I supported and encouraged to continue my education, which I did.
I subsequently graduated secondary school and I did exceptionally well at the Caribbean Council exams.
I sat nine subjects and I got all grade ones.
So I was able to get into sixth form.
So I was a statistic in every sense, but I I overcame those those hurdles.
I went to sixth form at one of the most prestigious secondary schools in the country.
It's called Queens College.
And I sat for subjects and I got all four A's.
I always wanted to be a nurse.
And that's owing to the fact that my dad spent a lot of time in the hospital.
And my mom used to take me every Sunday.
We'd go to visit him because he spent like weeks, sometimes months in the hospital.
I wasn't allowed to go during the week school time.
So she would take me every Sunday.
And I quite admired the way the nurses looked after him.
And I said, you know what, that's what I want to do with my life when I'm older.
So I had this in my head.
I want to be a nurse.
And in order for me to be a nurse, I need to focus.
I need to take my education seriously.
I did just that.
So my after I completed my sixth form, I actually started teaching.
I was a primary school teacher, but I didn't like it at all.
It wasn't something that I wanted to do.
It was just, you know, a way to make a bit of money at that time.
Because getting into university to do nursing was really hard in the early 2000s.
So I did encounter a few challenges while, you know, trying to get into nursing school.
So instead of sitting at home because I had a child to look after as well, I decided to teach.
I did that for quite some time and I didn't like it.
And then an opportunity, a little window opened itself for me to get into nursing school.
And I did.
But I had a lovely childhood.
I can't come except for losing my dad.
I think my childhood was relatively normal and quite fun.
You said you liked reading.
What things did you like to read?
Yeah, I like I do love a good mystery.
My dad was in my dad was fond of Western books.
So I did, you know, dabble a little in that.
But it wasn't, you know, the genre that I liked.
So I ended up, you know, into mystery.
I started off, you know, as a teen, I'd go read all the Nancy Drew books, Hardy Boys and the library.
And, you know, I just loved reading.
I just love reading.
Is it something you still get to do now?
I, you know, honestly, haven't read much since I moved here in the UK.
I've been busy with work and I started my master's degree program, but I had to pause that.
So I haven't I've just lost all motivation, you know, to read.
So now that I have another little one, another little one, I'm going to I've started reading to her again.
So I'm, you know, trying to get back into the swing of reading and, you know, falling in love with it all over again.
Sounds great. Sounds like an important part of you.
It is. It is quite because it reminds me so much of my dad.
That because the first book that he got me, he used to work quite late and I used to wait up at night.
Even though my mom would send me off to bed, I'd say, you know, I'm waiting on my dad.
And he'd come home and no matter how tired he was, he'd still read me a story.
And I did that with my eldest. No matter how tired I was, I'd get home and I'd read her a story.
And I started reading for her from the same book and she loves reading as well.
So I think it's something I really want to pass on to my other child.
I'm sure you will. Great role modeling with readings.
Anything else you'd like to tell us about your childhood or growing up?
Well, like I said, it was relatively calm and simple. I had lots of fun.
I didn't have any siblings close by because my other two sisters lived away with their mom.
And that's basically it. It was just simple.
It was just a simple upbringing, simple childhood.
Thank you for sharing about that.
You've talked about one time or moment that was important when you got your nursing qualifications.
But my next question is, can you tell me about a magic moment when something changed for you?
I wonder if there's something else.
Oh, I can't think of anything.
I think it was coming here because it was something out of, you know, something out.
In my mind, it was something out of a novel because I never expected to get this far.
So all the while I was going through the process to get my visa and come here, I was still a bit in denial, still a bit shocked.
But then I got when I landed at Manchester Airport, it felt surreal.
It felt I would like to say magical.
And I felt, you know, I've accomplished something and I was really, really proud, proud of myself.
Yeah, I can't think of anything. I really can't think of anything else.
That's a great moment. Like you say, that feeling of achievement and being proud of yourself.
Yeah.
That's definitely a magic moment.
Can you can you remember anything more about about how it felt and that pride you felt about what you've done?
Yeah, I.
For me, it was while it was a magical moment for me, it was also bittersweet for my family back home because I was leaving and I left my eldest back home because I wasn't I wasn't sure what I was coming into here.
So, yeah, that that's that's it.
My next question is about hopes for the future.
She is she's she's quite accomplished as well for her age and she wants to be a doctor.
So I'm looking forward to that. I know she'll do it. I am supporting her.
Another thing is I am I would love to complete my master's degree.
So that's one of my hope for the future. And I'd like to write one of these days.
I haven't shared this with anybody for a really long time.
But my my one of my, you know, little dream is to write to be an author and to teach but in nursing education.
That's my you know, one of one of the things that I'm looking forward to the future.
Just having a nice simple life.
I don't want a lot.
Just sound like beautiful dreams.
And I'm sure you're going to achieve them.
I think you'd be a great writer.
You have an aptitude for storytelling.
Just a little bit I've I've heard.
Yeah. Yeah.
What when you say you'd like to teach, why is that?
What excites you about that?
I think the excitement comes from the fact that I've had loads of great teachers and they've imparted a lot in me.
They've supported me even when I was pregnant.
One particular teacher I remember in secondary school, she came to me and she said, we all know that you're pregnant.
We could see it even though you're trying to hide it.
But I just want you to know that we love you and we support you.
And I carry those words with me even now.
And, you know, sometimes when I'm having a really, really rough time and I'm reflecting on all that I've been through, those words, they tend to echo.
And I'd like to be able to, you know, I would like to be able to be that for somebody.
And I have been told that I'm really, really good at teaching.
I can sit and explain something to somebody in, you know, in great details, you know, to get them to understand.
And I think that'd be beneficial to, you know, the nursing profession.
So since I'm already in it, you know, just venture down the education path.
That sounds brilliant. And is it the masters that can help you to get it?
It is the masters that can help me.
That sounds like a beautiful plan.
I think you'll be a fantastic teacher.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Are there any other hopes or aspirations for the future that you'd like to share with us before we go on to the next?
No, my life is a bit dull.
I just want the little simple things.
Yeah. Yeah. And you deserve that too.
OK. My last question is, is there anything else, either going back to the questions we've already been through or other things that you feel like you would like to share or that you think is important for people to know about your story?
Yeah, I'd just like to leave this bit of this, you know, I'd like to think of myself as a positive person, looking back at all that I've been through in my life.
I've always remained positive. And whomever my story might reach to, I hope that, you know, they can use my story and be inspired, be motivated to keep pressing on despite the odds.
It's really beautiful. Thank you.
Thank you.
OK. So is there anything else you'd like to share? Otherwise we can start wrapping up and get back to you.
I think that's it.
OK. It's just a beautiful interview. Thank you so much.